Combined monetary policy decisions and
statement
18 December 2025
Monetary policy decisions
The Governing Council today decided to keep the three key ECB interest rates unchanged. Its
updated assessment reconfirms that inflation should stabilise at the 2% target in the medium term.
The new Eurosystem staff projections show headline inflation averaging 2.1% in 2025, 1.9% in 2026,
1.8% in 2027 and 2.0% in 2028. For inflation excluding energy and food, staff project an average of
2.4% in 2025, 2.2% in 2026, 1.9% in 2027 and 2.0% in 2028. Inflation has been revised up for 2026,
mainly because staff now expect services inflation to decline more slowly. Economic growth is
expected to be stronger than in the September projections, driven especially by domestic demand.
Growth has been revised up to 1.4% in 2025, 1.2% in 2026 and 1.4% in 2027 and is expected to
remain at 1.4% in 2028.
The Governing Council is determined to ensure that inflation stabilises at its 2% target in the medium
term. It will follow a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the appropriate
monetary policy stance. In particular, the Governing Council’s interest rate decisions will be based on
its assessment of the inflation outlook and the risks surrounding it, in light of the incoming economic
and financial data, as well as the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy
transmission. The Governing Council is not pre-committing to a particular rate path.
Key ECB interest rates
The interest rates on the deposit facility, the main refinancing operations and the marginal lending
facility will remain unchanged at 2.00%, 2.15% and 2.40% respectively.
European Central Bank
Directorate General Communications
Sonnemannstrasse 20, 60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Tel.: +49 69 1344 7455, email: media@ecb.europa.eu, website: www.ecb.europa.eu
Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.
Asset purchase programme (APP) and pandemic emergency
purchase programme (PEPP)
The APP and PEPP portfolios are declining at a measured and predictable pace, as the Eurosystem
no longer reinvests the principal payments from maturing securities.
***
The Governing Council stands ready to adjust all of its instruments within its mandate to ensure that
inflation stabilises at its 2% target in the medium term and to preserve the smooth functioning of
monetary policy transmission. Moreover, the Transmission Protection Instrument is available to
counter unwarranted, disorderly market dynamics that pose a serious threat to the transmission of
monetary policy across all euro area countries, thus allowing the Governing Council to more effectively
deliver on its price stability mandate.
The President of the ECB will comment on the considerations underlying these decisions at a press
conference starting at 14:45 CET today.
Monetary policy statement
Press conference
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB,
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference.
The Governing Council today decided to keep the three key ECB interest rates unchanged. Our
updated assessment reconfirms that inflation should stabilise at our two per cent target in the medium
term.
The new Eurosystem staff projections show headline inflation averaging 2.1 per cent in 2025, 1.9 per
cent in 2026, 1.8 per cent in 2027 and 2.0 per cent in 2028. For inflation excluding energy and food,
staff project an average of 2.4 per cent in 2025, 2.2 per cent in 2026, 1.9 per cent in 2027 and 2.0 per
cent in 2028. Inflation has been revised up for 2026, mainly because staff now expect services
inflation to decline more slowly. Economic growth is expected to be stronger than in the September
projections, driven especially by domestic demand. Growth has been revised up to 1.4 per cent in
2025, 1.2 per cent in 2026 and 1.4 per cent in 2027 and is expected to remain at 1.4 per cent in 2028.
We are determined to ensure that inflation stabilises at our two per cent target in the medium term. We
will follow a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the appropriate
monetary policy stance. In particular, our interest rate decisions will be based on our assessment of
the inflation outlook and the risks surrounding it, in light of the incoming economic and financial data,
as well as the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. We
are not pre-committing to a particular rate path.
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website.
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.
Economic activity
The economy has been resilient. It grew by 0.3 per cent in the third quarter, mainly reflecting stronger
consumption and investment. Exports also increased, with a significant contribution from chemicals.
The sectoral composition of growth was dominated by services, especially in the information and
communication sector, while activity in industry and construction remained flat. This pattern of
services-led growth is likely to continue in the near term.
The economy is benefiting from a robust labour market. Unemployment, at 6.4 per cent in October, is
close to its historical low, and employment grew by 0.2 per cent in the third quarter. At the same time,
labour demand cooled further, with the job vacancy rate at its lowest level since the pandemic.
The staff projections see domestic demand as the main engine of growth in the years ahead. Real
incomes are set to rise further and the saving rate should gradually come down from its still high level,
supporting consumption. Business investment and substantial government spending on infrastructure
and defence should increasingly underpin the economy. However, the challenging environment for
global trade is likely to remain a drag on growth in the euro area this year and next.
The Governing Council stresses the urgent need to strengthen the euro area and its economy in the
present geopolitical context. We welcome the European Commission’s call for governments to
prioritise sustainable public finances, strategic investment and growth-enhancing structural reforms.
Unlocking the full potential of the Single Market is crucial. It is also vital to foster further capital market
integration by completing the savings and investments union and the banking union to an ambitious
timetable, and to rapidly adopt the Regulation on the establishment of the digital euro.
Inflation
Annual inflation has been in a narrow range since the spring and remained at 2.1 per cent in
November. Energy prices were 0.5 per cent lower than a year ago, after a larger decline in October.
Food price inflation was 2.4 per cent, after 2.5 per cent in October and 3.0 per cent in September.
Inflation excluding energy and food was steady at 2.4 per cent, as goods and services inflation moved
in opposite directions. Goods inflation declined to 0.5 in November, from 0.6 per cent in October and
0.8 per cent in September. Services inflation rose to 3.4 per cent in October and 3.5 per cent in
November, from 3.2 per cent in September.
Indicators of underlying inflation have changed little over recent months and remain consistent with
our two per cent medium-term target. While growth in unit profits was unchanged in the third quarter,
unit labour costs grew at a slightly higher rate than in the second quarter. Compensation per employee
rose at an annual rate of 4.0 per cent. This was more than expected in the September staff
projections, and was due to payments over and above negotiated wages. Forward-looking indicators,
such as the ECB’s wage tracker and surveys on wage expectations, suggest that wage growth will
ease in the coming quarters, before stabilising somewhat below 3 per cent towards the end of 2026.
Inflation should decline in the near term, mostly because past energy price rises will drop out of the
annual rates. Staff expect it to stay below 2 per cent on average in 2026 and 2027, with energy
inflation negative over most of this period and inflation excluding energy gradually declining. Inflation
should then return to target in 2028, amid a strong rise in energy inflation. This in part reflects the
upward effect on inflation of the EU Emissions Trading System 2, which is now expected to start in
2028, a year later than assumed in the September staff projections. Inflation excluding energy is
projected to stabilise at around 2 per cent in the final years of the projection horizon.
Most measures of longer-term inflation expectations continue to stand at around 2 per cent, supporting
the stabilisation of inflation around our target.
Risk assessment
While trade tensions have eased, the still volatile international environment could disrupt supply
chains, dampen exports, and weigh on consumption and investment. A deterioration in global financial
market sentiment could lead to tighter financing conditions, greater risk aversion and weaker growth.
Geopolitical tensions, in particular Russia’s unjustified war against Ukraine, remain a major source of
uncertainty. By contrast, planned defence and infrastructure spending, together with productivity-
enhancing reforms, may drive up growth by more than expected. An improvement in confidence could
stimulate private spending.
The outlook for inflation continues to be more uncertain than usual on account of the still volatile
international environment. Inflation could turn out to be lower if the rise in US tariffs reduces demand
for euro area exports and if countries with overcapacity increase their exports to the euro area.
Moreover, a stronger euro could bring inflation down further than expected. An increase in volatility
and risk aversion in financial markets could weigh on demand and thereby also lower inflation. By
contrast, inflation could turn out to be higher if more fragmented global supply chains pushed up
import prices, curtailed the supply of critical raw materials and added to capacity constraints in the
euro area economy. A slower reduction in wage pressures could delay the decline in services inflation.
A boost in defence and infrastructure spending could also raise inflation over the medium term.
Extreme weather events, and the unfolding climate and nature crises more broadly, could drive up
food prices by more than expected.
Financial and monetary conditions
Market rates have increased since our last meeting. Bank lending rates for firms have been broadly
stable since the summer, after falling in response to our policy rate cuts over the previous year. In
October they stood at 3.5 per cent, unchanged from September. The cost of issuing market-based
debt was 3.4 per cent, also close to its September level. The average interest rate on new mortgages
again held steady, at 3.3 per cent in October.
Bank lending to firms grew by 2.9 per cent on a yearly basis in October, unchanged from September.
Corporate bond issuance rose by 3.2 per cent, broadly unchanged as well. Mortgage lending
strengthened, growing by 2.8 per cent after 2.6 per cent in September.
In line with our monetary policy strategy, the Governing Council thoroughly assessed the links
between monetary policy and financial stability. Euro area banks are resilient, supported by strong
capital and liquidity ratios, solid asset quality and robust profitability. But geopolitical uncertainty and
the possibility of a sudden repricing in global financial markets pose risks to financial stability in the
euro area. Macroprudential policy remains the first line of defence against the build-up of financial
vulnerabilities, enhancing resilience and preserving macroprudential space.
Conclusion
The Governing Council today decided to keep the three key ECB interest rates unchanged. We are
determined to ensure that inflation stabilises at our two per cent target in the medium term. We will
follow a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the appropriate monetary
policy stance. Our interest rate decisions will be based on our assessment of the inflation outlook and
the risks surrounding it, in light of the incoming economic and financial data, as well as the dynamics
of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. We are not pre-committing to
a particular rate path.
In any case, we stand ready to adjust all of our instruments within our mandate to ensure that inflation
stabilises sustainably at our medium-term target and to preserve the smooth functioning of monetary
policy transmission.
We are now ready to take your questions.