Combined monetary policy decisions and
statement
5 February 2026
Monetary policy decisions
The Governing Council today decided to keep the three key ECB interest rates unchanged. Its
updated assessment reconfirms that inflation should stabilise at its 2% target in the medium term. The
economy remains resilient in a challenging global environment. Low unemployment, solid private
sector balance sheets, the gradual rollout of public spending on defence and infrastructure and the
supportive effects of the past interest rate cuts are underpinning growth. At the same time, the outlook
is still uncertain, owing particularly to ongoing global trade policy uncertainty and geopolitical tensions.
The Governing Council is determined to ensure that inflation stabilises at its 2% target in the medium
term. It will follow a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the appropriate
monetary policy stance. In particular, the Governing Council’s interest rate decisions will be based on
its assessment of the inflation outlook and the risks surrounding it, in light of the incoming economic
and financial data, as well as the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy
transmission. The Governing Council is not pre-committing to a particular rate path.
Key ECB interest rates
The interest rates on the deposit facility, the main refinancing operations and the marginal lending
facility will remain unchanged at 2.00%, 2.15% and 2.40% respectively.
European Central Bank
Directorate General Communications
Sonnemannstrasse 20, 60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Tel.: +49 69 1344 7455, email: media@ecb.europa.eu, website: www.ecb.europa.eu
Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.
Asset purchase programme (APP) and pandemic emergency
purchase programme (PEPP)
The APP and PEPP portfolios are declining at a measured and predictable pace, as the Eurosystem
no longer reinvests the principal payments from maturing securities.
***
The Governing Council stands ready to adjust all of its instruments within its mandate to ensure that
inflation stabilises at its 2% target in the medium term and to preserve the smooth functioning of
monetary policy transmission. Moreover, the Transmission Protection Instrument is available to
counter unwarranted, disorderly market dynamics that pose a serious threat to the transmission of
monetary policy across all euro area countries, thus allowing the Governing Council to more effectively
deliver on its price stability mandate.
The President of the ECB will comment on the considerations underlying these decisions at a press
conference starting at 14:45 CET today.
Monetary policy statement
Press conference
Christine Lagarde, President of the ECB,
Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the ECB
Good afternoon, the Vice-President and I welcome you to our press conference.
We would like to begin by congratulating Bulgaria on joining the euro area on 1 January 2026. We
also warmly welcome Dimitar Radev, the Governor of Българска народна банка (Bulgarian National
Bank), to the Governing Council. Membership of the euro area has almost doubled since 1999 and is
testimony to the attractiveness of the single currency and the enduring benefits of European
integration.
We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting.
The Governing Council today decided to keep the three key ECB interest rates unchanged. Our
updated assessment reconfirms that inflation should stabilise at our two per cent target in the medium
term. The economy remains resilient in a challenging global environment. Low unemployment, solid
private sector balance sheets, the gradual rollout of public spending on defence and infrastructure and
the supportive effects of our past interest rate cuts are underpinning growth. At the same time, the
outlook is still uncertain, owing particularly to ongoing global trade policy uncertainty and geopolitical
tensions.
We are determined to ensure that inflation stabilises at our two per cent target in the medium term. We
will follow a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the appropriate
monetary policy stance. In particular, our interest rate decisions will be based on our assessment of
the inflation outlook and the risks surrounding it, in light of the incoming economic and financial data,
as well as the dynamics of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. We
are not pre-committing to a particular rate path.
The decisions taken today are set out in a press release available on our website.
I will now outline in more detail how we see the economy and inflation developing and will then explain
our assessment of financial and monetary conditions.
Economic activity
The economy grew by 0.3 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2025, according to Eurostat’s preliminary
flash estimate. Growth has mainly been driven by services, notably in the information and
communication sector. Manufacturing has been resilient despite the headwinds from global trade and
geopolitical uncertainty. Momentum in construction is picking up, also supported by public investment.
The labour market continues to support incomes, even though demand for labour has cooled further.
Unemployment stood at 6.2 per cent in December, after 6.3 per cent in November. Growing labour
incomes together with a lower household saving rate should bolster private consumption. Government
spending on defence and infrastructure should also contribute to domestic demand. Business
investment should strengthen further, and surveys indicate that firms are increasingly investing in new
digital technologies. At the same time, the external environment remains challenging, owing to higher
tariffs and a stronger euro over the past year.
The Governing Council stresses the urgent need to strengthen the euro area and its economy in the
present geopolitical context. Governments should prioritise sustainable public finances, strategic
investment and growth-enhancing structural reforms. Unlocking the full potential of the Single Market
remains crucial. It is also vital to foster greater capital market integration by completing the savings
and investments union and the banking union to an ambitious timetable, and to rapidly adopt the
Regulation on the establishment of the digital euro.
Inflation
Inflation declined to 1.7 per cent in January, from 2.0 per cent in December and 2.1 per cent in
November. Energy inflation dropped to -4.1 per cent, after -1.9 per cent in December and -0.5 per cent
in November, while food price inflation increased to 2.7 per cent, from 2.5 per cent in December and
2.4 per cent in November. Inflation excluding energy and food eased to 2.2 per cent, after 2.3 per cent
in December and 2.4 per cent in November. Goods inflation edged up to 0.4 per cent, whereas
services inflation declined to 3.2 per cent, from 3.4 per cent in December and 3.5 per cent in
November.
Indicators of underlying inflation have changed little over recent months and remain consistent with
our two per cent medium-term target. Negotiated wage growth and forward-looking indicators, such as
the ECB’s wage tracker and surveys on wage expectations, point to a continued moderation in labour
costs. However, the contribution to overall wage growth from payments over and above the negotiated
wage component remains uncertain.
Most measures of longer-term inflation expectations continue to stand at around 2 per cent, supporting
the stabilisation of inflation around our target.
Risk assessment
The euro area continues to face a volatile global policy environment. A renewed increase in
uncertainty could weigh on demand. A deterioration in global financial market sentiment could also
dampen demand. Further frictions in international trade could disrupt supply chains, reduce exports
and weaken consumption and investment. Geopolitical tensions, in particular Russia’s unjustified war
against Ukraine, remain a major source of uncertainty. By contrast, planned defence and infrastructure
spending, together with the adoption of productivity-enhancing reforms and the adoption of new
technologies by euro area firms, may drive up growth by more than expected, including through
positive effects on business and consumer confidence. New trade agreements and a deeper
integration of our European Single Market could also boost growth beyond current expectations.
The outlook for inflation continues to be more uncertain than usual on account of the volatile global
policy environment. Inflation could turn out to be lower if tariffs reduce demand for euro area exports
by more than expected and if countries with overcapacity increase further their exports to the euro
area. Moreover, a stronger euro could bring inflation down beyond current expectations. More volatile
and risk-averse financial markets could weigh on demand and thereby also lower inflation. By
contrast, inflation could turn out to be higher if there were a persistent upward shift in energy prices, or
if more fragmented global supply chains pushed up import prices, curtailed the supply of critical raw
materials and added to capacity constraints in the euro area economy. If wage growth moderated
more slowly, services inflation might come down later than expected. The planned boost in defence
and infrastructure spending could also cause inflation to pick up over the medium term. Extreme
weather events, and the unfolding climate and nature crises more broadly, could drive up food prices
by more than expected.
Financial and monetary conditions
Market rates have come down since our last meeting, while global trade and geopolitical tensions
temporarily increased financial market volatility. Bank lending rates for firms ticked up to 3.6 per cent
in December, from 3.5 per cent in November, as did the cost of issuing market-based debt. The
average interest rate on new mortgages again held steady, at 3.3 per cent in December.
Bank lending to firms grew by 3.0 per cent on a yearly basis in December, after 3.1 per cent in
November and 2.9 per cent in October. The issuance of corporate bonds rose by 3.4 per cent in
December. According to our latest bank lending survey for the euro area, firms’ demand for credit was
up slightly in the fourth quarter, especially to finance inventories and working capital. At the same time,
credit standards for business loans tightened again.
Mortgage lending grew by 3.0 per cent, after 2.9 per cent in November and 2.8 per cent in October, in
response to still rising demand for loans and an easing of credit standards.
Conclusion
The Governing Council today decided to keep the three key ECB interest rates unchanged. We are
determined to ensure that inflation stabilises at our two per cent target in the medium term. We will
follow a data-dependent and meeting-by-meeting approach to determining the appropriate monetary
policy stance. Our interest rate decisions will be based on our assessment of the inflation outlook and
the risks surrounding it, in light of the incoming economic and financial data, as well as the dynamics
of underlying inflation and the strength of monetary policy transmission. We are not pre-committing to
a particular rate path.
In any case, we stand ready to adjust all of our instruments within our mandate to ensure that inflation
stabilises sustainably at our medium-term target and to preserve the smooth functioning of monetary
policy transmission.
We are now ready to take your questions.